---
title: 'Perspective on Technical Interviews'
date: 2018-02-27
permalink: /posts/2017/12/blog-post-5/
tags:
  - Interviews
  - Introspection
---


Let's start off with a fairly standard probability question you might expect to see in a technical interview.

> What is the probability that you roll an eight with two six sided dice?

Fairly straight forward.  I think any technical candidate could work their way through the solution, which may look something like...

> Well, let's think of all the ways I could roll an 8.  There is 2 and 6, 3 and 5, 4 and 4.  Since I am rolling two dice, I could roll a 2 first and then a 6, or a 6 first and then a 2, so I should double count those ones.  I think that leaves me with 5 possible ways.  There are 36 ways to roll 2 dice.  So I think its 5/36.

And that would be a totally legitimate way to answer that question.  Unfortunately , that is not the first way I would think to solve this question.  My solution would be go like...

> Well, I know I can model a die roll using a uniform distribution, so the problem is really asking me for the probability that the sum of two uniform discrete random variables on [1,6] is 8.  I know the sum of two random variables is just their convolution, so the probability is the convolution evaluated at 8.


That is also a legitimate way of solving the problem.  For those of you who don't hire people, though my solution is correct, _it isn't a good solution_  if it can be considered a solution at all. 

# I Am Lazy, But I Am Not Stupid
 
I think I chose to solve this problem in the way I've mentioned because I am lazy and I want an easy way to finding the solution.  This reminds me of a relevant Bill Gate's quote

>I choose a lazy person to do a hard job. Because a lazy person will find an easy way to do it.

I don't want to enumerate solutions in my head, that is a lot of work. I'd rather outline a method to solve the problem, and then execute that solution.  That is much more streamlined, efficient, and requires less mental effort on my part.  Plus, I can pass on the hard parts to a computer, which (unlike myself) doesn't make arithmetic mistakes.  

But this laziness goes deeper.  This problem mentioned two dice and the probability of rolling an 8.  What if I had three dice?  Four? Four hundred?  What if they had twelve sides? Twenty?  What if instead of asking what the probability of rolling an exact number, I asked for the probability of rolling a number less than some number? What if one of the dice were loaded?  What if they were all loaded? What if they were all loaded in different ways?

All these problems have a common theme: they involve the probability of sums of discrete uniform random variables.  So instead of committing one solution of one variant to memory, why not abstract away all the details and solve the most general problem possible?  That way, I don't have to worry about the details as much, I can just focus my efforts on the abstraction and the solution will come easily.

To me, leveraging theory in this way is the best solution.  You solve a class of problems by laying the problem on a theoretical framework, and solving it there.  I get the right solution, with minimal work.  The solution may not be easy to compute, but that is what a computer is for, right?  Besides, if you are just measuring my problem solving capacity, then _surely_ I've demonstrated my ability.


# Industry Is Not Like Academia

These technical interviews are not contests.  The interviewers are likely not trying to find someone with the most elegant or efficient solution, they just want to examine your problem solving skills.  The first explanation of the solution does just that, while mine is...well, not very clear if you don't understand convolutions.

Moreover, my solution doesn't demonstrate my ability to work with numbers. What these technical interviews also test is the candidate's number sense, or their ability to call _B.S_ when numbers don't sound right.  You probably want to show your interviewers that you can pick up when numbers are way out of whack, and solving these problems in a style similar to the first solution may be one way to do it.

# What Have I Learned

I suppose you expect me to have some resolve at the end of this article, where I change my ways and vow to be better in technical interviews.  Screw that!

This style of problem solving is my style.  That is how I operate and solve problems.  I don't want to change my style just because interviewers expect that.  It would almost be deceitful not to demonstrate exactly who I am.  If my style doesn't jive with the company or the team, then I'm glad I learned that.  That role probably wasn't the one for me.

Is my perspective brazen?  Yes.  But until this proves to be a problem hindering my career, or my ability to actually solve problems, I don't see myself changing my style.  What I might have to change is my ability quickly to compute convolutions by hand.

