---
title: 'GSoC19: The Adjoint Method is a Big Differential Equation'
date: 2019-05-21
permalink: /posts/2019/05/blog-post-13/
tags:
---

Let's take stock of exactly where we are in this journey it implement HMC for differential equations.

First, we concatenate all the parameters we wish to estimate into a single vector (call it $\theta$).  Then, create a momentum variable (call it $p$ for some weird reason.  Why do physicists denote MMMMMMomentum with $p$?) of the same dimension as $\theta$ and consider the joint distribution

$$\pi(\theta,p) = \pi(p|\theta)\pi(\theta)$$

We choose a momentum distribution for $p$ and then use The Hamiltonian to define a set of differential equations governing the dynamics of an imaginary particle on some high dimensional surface.  The differential equations are

$$ \dfrac{d\theta}{dt} = p $$

$$ \dfrac{dp}{dt} = -\dfrac{\partial V}{\partial q}$$

Here, $V = \log(pi(\theta))$, the log density of out parameters.  Given some initial random momentum, the ODEs above say that the particle's rate of change per unit time is equivalent to the momentum, but the momentum's rate of change depends on how the surface on which it travels is shaped. *So the momentum governs the trajectory in time over the surface, and the surface governs how the momentum will change in time*.  Yes, that certainly sounds like a differential equation problem.

I won't get into how we integrate this system.  I think [Colin Carrol](https://colindcarroll.com/) has done a very good job or boiling down the essence of HMC into something more digestible, but if you want the *whole shebang* on HMC, please read Michael Betancourt's "*A Conceptual Introduction of Hamiltonian Monte Carlo*".


## We Need ODEs to Solve ODEs to Compute Gradients of ODEs

So HMC is just (ok not JUST, but for the purposes of this blog post) a set of differential equations which can be cleverly integrated to get samples from a posterior.  I've said before that if we want to do Bayesian analysis for ODEs, we need to compute gradients with respect to the ODE's solution, $\grad y$.  Those gradients that we compute will live in $\partial V / \partial q$ above.

But computing $\grad y$ is difficult, especially considering that most ODEs of practical application are solved numerically, not exactly.  Thankfully, someone much smarter than me has already addressed this problem.
