---
title: "Deciding To Take A Break"
date: 2019-11-26
permalink: /posts/2019/08/blog-post-23/
tags:
---

I've recently decided to take a break from my PhD starting May of 2020. This blog post will outline some thoughts I have about the decision, including:  why I decided to do a PhD, how I feel the experience has changed me, and what I think may happen if I don't take a break.  I'm not going to pull any punches, but I'm also not going to name any names.  I want this to be an open, fair, but frank conversation on what goes on during a PhD.

## Why I Started

I started my first data analyst job on September 12 2016, a full four days after I turned 24 and defended my masters.  It was an admitedly short time to transition from grad student to full time employee, but at the time I felt I was late to "join the party" with my friends living and working in Toronto, and was eager to go join them.  I thought being a data analyst would require some rigor, and that it would be more or less like research.  I was wrong, and I can admit now that I was looking at data science through rose colored glasses.  

I found the adjustment very hard.  There is a part of me that sees unrigours analysis as a way of taking advantage of people, as if to say "I'm using fancy math.  That lends credibility to me, and so you have to believe what I say".  I won't go into how I rationalized that, but suffice to say that when I saw unrigorous analysis being passed off as if it was defensible I got upset.

I thought one way I could rectify this was to get a PhD.  If I had a PhD, then who would be foolish enough to ignore my cries of malpractice?  It also didn'y help that I had a very rough time transitioning to office culture.  That is something I still struggle with even to this day.  I started to look back on grad school and wish for the sort of freedom I had when I was writing my thesis and doing analysis.  So, in October of 2016 (just a little over a month after starting), I started thinking about going back for a PhD in statistics.

I should say that these were not the only reasons I wanted a PhD.  I started to think about doing one near the end of my masters, but the lure of "real life" was more appealing at the time.  I've always had a deep passion for math, and to do a PhD would to me be taking math as far as it could be taken.  I thought of it as a test of my passion and talent, and I wanted to say I could conquer it.  The PhD still remains a perosnal goal and not a tool for career advancement or a means of breaking into the academic job market.

Six months after I started my job, I gave my notice.  I would spend the remaining time in Toronto doing research with my future supervisor and enjoying the city.  Before I left, I made the following promises to myself:  If ever I would a) have to spend my money on tuition of living expenses, or b) suffer extended periods of poor mental health due to being in grad school, then I would leave the PhD.  Adhering to these promises would prove challenging, and I think would ultimately govern how I would act in my PhD.

## How Has The Experience Changed Me

There is no doubt the PhD has improved my understanding of statistics and science more broadly.  There have also been some changes I'm not too happy with.  During the first year of my PhD I was known as the "statistical grouch".  I think that was mostly due to me not having many peers.  My department is nearly 90% epidemiology students, many of which don't come from mathematical backgrounds.  I couldn't have the same conversations I had at Waterloo.  I didn't have anyone to show cool results to.  I felt alone and a bit alienated.

I think this lonlieness began to manifest as unhapiness both with my department and my institution.  I remember my funding was cut in September of my second year, and though my supervisor swiftly rectified the problem, I felt it was neccesary to tweet very aggressive tweets at the school of medicine (under which my department sits).  I'm embarrased about it now, but at the time I felt they were taking advantage of me.  The reaction I had wasn't proportional, but for some reason it was the first place I went.

I lost a lot of patience.  As a TA, I often required corrective action, something that I didn' require at Waterloo (I TA'd something like 6 classes at Waterloo and was actally nominated for a TA award for my performance in Engineering Calculus).  I'm not sure why I lost patience with my students.  I like to think it was because I know stats is a tool to them and not something they have interest in.  Maybe I took that personally, maybe I didn't.  I started to feel like no one cared about the work I was doing, and so I started to care less and less about my responsibilities. This lack of patience entered my work life as a statistician at the local hopstial. I started to percieve physicians as adversarial for using poor stats instead of thinking of me as helping them.  Like it was me versus all the people who were misuing statistics and getting patted on the back for it.