---
title: "I Never Want To Hear 'Bayesian Stats Is Subjective' Again"
date: 2020-06-13
permalink: /posts/2020/06/blog-post-24/
tags:
---


>"Radical Bayesian approaches to causal inference focus on subjective probabilities: they reduce epistemology, and therefore causal inference, to individual subjectivity (psychology)"

That is what some paper sent to me by a colleague read.  And while I beleive that the authors are likely smart and well accomplished, this sentiment is frankly BS.

Andrew Gelman has this funny quip about how back in the late 80s or early 90s, Bayesians wouldn't check their models because "[their] model is subjective and therefore it can't be checked".  Gelman rightly pokes fun at these people (likely caricatures, I would be very surprised if these were actually arugments made to Gelman), because "what kind of person doesn't go around checking their personal beleifs"?  The validity or usefulness of your conclusions can be evaluated *even if* they originated from highly personal beleifs. Your beleifs can be checked.

What I assume people mean when they say "Bayes is subjective" is that Bayesians could ostensibly pick any priors they want in order to yield conclusions they want and simply hide behind epistemoligcal relativism to defend themselves from critique.  But the thing is that though priors may be freely chosen by the modeler, they are no more beyond reproach than frequentist models. In the same way you can check the appropiriatness of te assumptions made by linear regression, you can check if my priors yield realistic data.

The prior combined with the likelihood is itself a model.  By being a model, it can be checked (via prior predictive checks).  So why not check it?  If I could generate data from my model (and I can), show it to you, and we both agree it looks real-ish, is that not a form of model checking?  Because we do that all the time with frequentist models.  Plot the residuals and make sure they kinda look like a cloud and not a trumpet.  Those sound like the same thing to me, excpet my step comes before data and yours comes after.

So what I would love to hear from people in the audience when I give talks to non-Bayesians is "convince me that your priors work" and not "your priors are subjective". Was it Sun Tzu who said "attack an enemy's weakest point and you will defeat them.  But attack an enemy's strongest point and you will destroy them"?  I literally can't argue against "your beleifs are subjective".   Anything I say is a beleif of mine, and is therefore subject to the same criticism. So if you want an easy win (and want me to mock you after the talk when I go for beer), then go ahead and make that argument.  If instead you want to embarass me infront of my colleagues (like I imagine some professors I know do), meet me on my own ground and show me my priors are wrong.  Even if priors were subjective, you could still check them.  That two people could come to the same conclusion re: priors, that they generate realish data or not, doesn't sound subjective to me.
