---
title: "Riddler Solutions"
date: 2021-05-11
permalink: /posts/2021/04/blog-post-30/
tags:
---


I like [Riddler](https://fivethirtyeight.com/features/are-you-smarter-than-a-fourth-grader/) from 538 mostly because you can solve the riddles with some fun math.  If the riddle is interesting enough, [I will post solutions on my  blog](https://dpananos.github.io/posts/2017/12/blog-post-2/).  This is one such riddle.

## The Riddle

>You and your infinitely many friends are sharing a cake, and you come up with two rather bizarre ways of splitting it.
>For the first method, Friend 1 takes half of the cake, Friend 2 takes a third of what remains, Friend 3 takes a quarter of what remains after Friend 2, Friend 4 takes a fifth of what remains after Friend 3, and so on. After your infinitely many friends take their respective pieces, you get whatever is left.
>For the second method, your friends decide to save you a little more of the take. This time around, Friend 1 takes 1/22 (or one-quarter) of the cake, Friend 2 takes 1/32 (or one-ninth) of what remains, Friend 3 takes 1/42 of what remains after Friend 3, and so on. Again, after your infinitely many friends take their respective pieces, you get whatever is left.
>
>Question 1: How much of the cake do you get using the first method?
>
>Question 2: How much of the cake do you get using the second method?

## The Solution

It is very easy to argue that method 1 leaves us no cake left.  Let's see why.  First, let's agree to model *how much cake is left* rather than how much the $k^{th}$ friend takes.  The first friend takes half (leaving us half a cake).  The second friend takes a third of what remains (meaning there are two thirds of one hand left).  The third friend takes a fourth of what remains (meaning there is three quarters of two thirds of one half left).  See the pattern?  Let $\pi_k$ be the proportion of pie (or, er cake) left after friend $k$ takes their share.  The sequence is

$$ \begin{align}  
\pi_1 &= \dfrac{1}{2}\\
\pi_2 &= \dfrac{2}{3} \times \dfrac{1}{2} = \dfrac{1}{3}\\
\pi_3 &= \dfrac{3}{4} \times \dfrac{2}{3} \times \dfrac{1}{2} = \dfrac{1}{4}\\
& \vdots\\
\pi_k = \dfrac{1}{k+1}
\end{align} $$

Since $\lim_{k \to \infty} \pi_k = 0$ we get no cake.  